 Enhancing Urban Planning through Improved
Connectivity: A Genetic Algorithm Approach for
          Optimal Service Placement

Georgii Kontsevik1[0009−0009−0889−9683] , Valeria Tikhevich1[0009−0002−5419−2100] ,
                  and Sergey Mityagin1[0000−0001−9877−1687]

          ITMO University, Birzhevaya line, 14, Saint Petersburg, Russia
                            kontsevik@niuitmo.ru



      Abstract. In this paper, a review of existing methods for optimal service
      placement to meet demand has been conducted. A problematic issue
      was identified in the form of insufficient flexibility of existing solutions
      for urban planning and development tasks in terms of optimal coverage
      location problem. The hypothesis that small improvements in connectivity
      between neighborhoods can significantly reduce the number of optimally
      placed services was confirmed. A sub-optimal solution was obtained
      using a genetic algorithm. As a result, recommendations were proposed
      to improve the transport connectivity between specific neighborhoods
      for the calculated time interval, which will reduce needed amount of
      additional facilities to fulfill the demand. The main contribution of this
      paper is to apply connectivity optimization and optimal service location
      algorithms together, resulting in a reduction in the number of services
      required.

      Keywords: Heuristic optimization, Location coverage problem, Spatial
      inequality, Spatial analysis.


1   Introduction

In modern society, characterized by the rapid pace of urban development and
the growth of industrial enterprises, the issue of improving the quality of life of
industrial workers becomes more than relevant. Given the continuous variability
of the city’s infrastructure, the constant need to provide city dwellers with basic
services, as well as the desire to improve the overall level of well-being, the
development of a method for optimal placement of urban services is of particular
importance.
    The concept of well-being is an important aspect of assessing the quality
of life of an individual and society as a whole. It includes many factors that
together determine the level of comfort and satisfaction with life [1]. The concept
of well-being has been studying for decades, but there is still no consensus on
its definition or how it should be measured [2]. Thus, the article [3] reveals
the concept of well-being through a person’s social behavior, his interaction
2       G. Kontsevik et al.

with other people and his interpersonal relationships; article [4] refers to other
main characteristics of well-being reflecting its understanding through spatial
dimensions. Such components include:
    1) all types of security (financial, physical, environmental and others);
    2) participation and involvement in nearby social activities;
    3) economic affordability of housing for all segments of the population with
different income levels;
    4) spatial accessibility to all services necessary for living;
    5) a sense of identity with the human environment.
    A high level of employee well-being is a key resource for increasing productivity
and competitiveness of the country’s economy as a whole. In the context of
the modern world, where technological progress and automation are of great
importance, ensuring the most comfortable working conditions and improving
the well-being of employees in industrial industries is a strategic step towards
sustainable development and prosperity of the country.
    Satisfied and motivated employees demonstrate higher quality of labor, which
leads to increased quantitative performance of the entire enterprise. Such em-
ployees may face special working conditions, safety requirements and specific
professional skills. A distinctive feature of industrial workers is their close con-
nection to production activities, which are often located outside the central city
districts, where the density of urban services is higher than on the outskirts. This
can create additional challenges for these employees as they have to commute to
work from other neighborhoods. A solution to this problem may lie in providing
better public transportation infrastructure or affordable housing near businesses.
Therefore, the pursuit of employee well-being in enterprises requires a holistic
approach that includes not only a comfortable working environment, but also
accessibility to housing, transportation and a variety of services.
    Spatial inequality manifests itself in the uneven distribution of resources
and opportunities in different neighborhoods. For example, according to [5], the
spatial mismatch between housing and work depends on the level of wages and
prices for rent / purchase of housing. Thus, articles [6,7] shows that middle-class
residents pays more than comfortable amount of money for rent half of the time.
    According to [8] the factors influencing the use of urban services are proximity
to residence, affordability and usability. In addressing spatial inequality, at least
one of these aspects can be improved, which in turn will lead to an increase in
overall well-being.
    It can be seen that there are three main factors that affect spatial inequality:
affordable housing, quality of transit options and connectivity to certain facilities.
    The main contribution of this paper is to combine changes in both connectivity
and additional services placement, since they used to be considered separately.
    The following paper structures as follows: section 2 presents related work on
optimal location coverage algorithms, section 3 presents the developed method in
detail, section 4 presents the application of developed method on specific urban
area.
                                                    2. RELATED WORKS               3

2    Related works

The problem of optimal service placement usually lies in the notion of business
and emergency facility locations. The problem is well studied and includes variety
of algorithms for many specific tasks. However, in recent years it gained more
attention since new technologies appeared in the field. The main trend in this
sphere is to solve the problem of optimal service placement, including more
scenarios, variables, agents and constraints.
    In [9], the p-median problem is considered in detail, which is to choose the
optimal location of facilities in the number of p units to serve the demand or
cover the area with minimum cost. This problem is also considered in [10], which
developed a location model for medical centers after analyzing their location,
demand for medical services and road network in Jeddah city, Saudi Arabia.
The study under review aims to optimize the network of medical services and
provide location recommendations to maximize service coverage. The study [11]
considers the p-median problem. However, in it, the object can serve any number
of demand points, i.e., the problem is "uncapacitated P-Median".
    The study [12] considers a problem, "the maximum coverage location problem"
(MCLP), which is also one of the classical problems in resource allocation and
facility location decision making. In contrast to the p-median problem, the MCLP
considers a situation where a certain number of locations must be selected in
order to maximize the total coverage of an area that is characterized by a set of
customers or facilities. To solve that problem, a metaheuristic algorithm, AILS-
PR, was proposed in [13]. Initially, there was an iterative local search (ILS). In
ILS, the initial benchmark solution is iteratively refined by a local search followed
by a perturbation phase. The perturbation phase aims to identify solutions that
are "close" to the reference solution, but with a better local optimum within its
neighborhood.
    Optimal placement of various health care facilities is important for providing
effective and timely medical care to the population. Therefore, it is their placement
that is most often encountered in scientific articles. Thus, in [14] the above
mentioned MCLP problem is considered to find the optimal placement of special
health care facilities. For its solution, the proposed modified Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) algorithm is used, which was compared with the results
of the GAMS algorithm, where the former showed better results. PSO is a
population-based stochastic optimization methodology (search algorithm). It
simulates the social behavior of a flock of birds, where each particle represents a
potential solution to the problem, i.e., a set of object locations.
    However, not only the location of medical facilities is considered in scientific
papers. For example, paper [15] presents a three-stage strategy to solve the cab
stand location problem (TSLP). First, points with high cab demand are extracted
from massive GPS cab data using a GIS platform, and the optimal area for cab
parking locations is determined in the next steps. Then, the spatial interaction
between cab demand and cab parking lots is investigated. Next, a cab stand
location model (TSLM) is developed to minimize the total cost, which includes
4       G. Kontsevik et al.

passenger access cost and construction cost of cab stands. A program based on
genetic algorithm is written to optimize the TSLM.
    The application of the genetic algorithm for solving the MCLP problem is also
discussed in the source [16]. However, in this paper, in addition to this algorithm,
the implementation of a heuristic algorithm is presented, as well as a comparison
of these methods with the software package "CPLEX". The proposed algorithms
showed results both in terms of time and quality better than the considered
solver. In turn, the heuristic method has superiority over the genetic method.
    In [17], another problem is considered, namely the capacitated location-routing
problem (CLRP), which is a combination of a facility location problem and a
transportation routing problem. The problem consists of determining the location
of warehouses, assigning each customer to one of the warehouses and determining
the routes. The approach proposed by the authors consists of 3 phases. In the first
phase, customers are clustered near warehouses based on distance and demand
using the developed two-level CSOM teacherless learning method. In the second
phase, the transportation routing problem for each cluster is solved by the Clarke
and Wright algorithm. In the third phase, the routes are improved by exchanging
clients between different routes using the "Or-Opt" method. The computational
results show better performance of the proposed approach and demonstrate its
effectiveness in solving large size problems.
    Another example of a problem combining facility location and transportation
assignment/routing issues is [18], which deals with an optimization approach
in firefighting. They present a robust optimization problem formulation, the so-
called Facility Location and Equipment Emplacement Technique with Expected
Coverage (FLEET-EXC) model, which maximizes the demand with respect to
vehicle utilization. The approach proposed by the authors iteratively improves
the solution of the fire station location and transportation assignment problem.
Testing was performed on a dataset provided by the national association of
firefighters of Chile. The results show that the considered method gave a more
accurate representation of the accident process than those commonly used in the
literature.
    The article [19] questions the concept of urban development where all necessary
services for living are within walking distance. Such a development vector has an
increased attention due to its advantages in health, economy and environmental
sustainability. A mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model, a constraint
programming (CP) model, and a greedy algorithm were used for optimization. The
authors tested their solutions on data describing disadvantaged neighborhoods in
the city of Toronto, Canada. As a result, MILP finds the best solutions in most
scenarios, but scales poorly with network size. The greedy algorithm scales well
and finds near-optimal solutions.
    Despite the fact that there are many studies on the optimal location of
facilities, the distance between the facilities that provide the service and those
facilities that provide the demand for the service is considered to be constant.
However, in the context of urban management, public transport routes and roads
are changing due to urban development and transportation reforms.
                                                              3. METHOD           5

    The contribution of this paper is to apply heuristic optimization to improve
the transport accessibility time between blocks to enhance the solution of the
location coverage problem. The result of the algorithm is recommendations for
improving the connectivity between specified neighborhoods. In this paper, this
problem is an applied task and the selected blocks are those where workers could
live in the potential location of a new enterprise.


3     Method

3.1   Hypothesis

The following hypothesis was investigated in this paper: improving connectivity
between neighborhoods by no more than 40% can reduce the minimum number
of optimally placed new polyclinics.


3.2   Location coverage problem setting

In this paper, the quality of life of a person will be considered as an average
assessment relative to the assessments of provision with various services and the
assessment of spatial mismatch between housing and work. For experimental
purposes, we will consider the service "Polyclinic", the location of which we will
optimize. As it was shown in the part with the review of existing solutions, the
MCLP algorithm provides solutions to maximize the demand coverage (provision
of all people living in a given area). In this paper we will use an improved version
of the MCLP algorithm - "CLSCP-SO" (Capacitated Location Set Covering
Problem-System Optimal), which takes into account the demand and capacity of
services. However, this algorithm works with the cost matrix as a constant. In this
case, the cost matrix is the availability matrix between the selected neighborhoods,
which will be optimized in this solution with respect to the number of located
clinics.


3.3   Genetic algorithm adoptation

This paper considers changing the cost matrix values (availability time between
selected blocks) in order to reduce the required number of services to cover the
unsatisfied demand. As an example, the Polyclinic service was considered as one
of the vital services directly affecting the quality of life of residents. There are
accessibility standards for different services that provide basic services. In this
case, for the polyclinic service this standard is 15 minutes. Consequently, if a
service does not fall within the accessibility zone of a residential building, its
residents are considered unserved.
    In order to improve the provision of the necessary service to the residents,
it is necessary to make it accessible: improve accessibility to existing services
and or add new services. Since this paper considers accessibility to service by
public transportation (which city managers can improve through reforms), it is
6       G. Kontsevik et al.

proposed to slightly improve transportation accessibility between the selected
neighborhoods.

    Since the norm for the selected Polyclinic service is 15 minutes and the
selected limit for improving accessibility is up to 40 percent, it is necessary
to consider those connections between neighborhoods that are greater than
the established norm (>15 minutes), but with improved connectivity could fall
within the specified norm. Thus, it is necessary to consider connections between
neighborhoods whose value does not exceed more than 25 minutes. (25*0.6=15)

    Sample of cost matrix:

    Colored cells indicate considered values to be optimized.




            block id 0        1   2    3    4    5     6    7    8    9
                0      0.0 11.3 21.0 25.0 27.6 26.5 34.6 32.4 26.1 25.0
                1     11.3 0.0 24.5 27.3 29.9 28.8 36.9 34.7 28.4 27.3
                2     17.3 20.4 0.0 13.8 22.8 21.8 29.9 27.7 21.3 20.2
                3     25.9 29.0 13.8 0.0 17.2 29.0 37.3 35.1 20.3 19.2
                4     26.3 29.4 26.6 18.6 0.0 21.2 35.6 33.4 25.8 24.4




    In this case, the genetic algorithm is its standard implementation. It works
by simulating the process of natural selection to optimize solutions to complex
problems [20]. At its core, a genetic algorithm starts with a set of potential
solutions presented as an initial population. These solutions are then evaluated
based on their fitness function, which determines how well they do the task.
Through the process of selection, crossover and mutation, the algorithm iteratively
develops the population, contributing to the reproduction of individuals with
higher fitness [21]. For several generations, the population has been striving for
optimal or almost optimal solutions, which makes genetic algorithms especially
effective in solving optimization problems in various fields, including urban studies.
Figure 1 shows the block diagram of the algorithm.
                                                                3. METHOD        7




                Fig. 1. The block diagram of the genetic algorithm




   However, it is important to note how exactly the initial population and fitness
function are specified.
   Population initialization:
    Matrices with modified considering values will be chosen as the initial popu-
lation.



                 Mi ∈ Rn×n     for i = 1, 2, . . . , population_size



   Mi,ij = random_uniform(0.6, 1) × cost_matrixij , if (i, j) ∈ selected cells


   Fitness function:
    In this case, the result of the optimal service placement algorithm (number of
services placed) will be used as a fitness function.



                       F (M ) = count(clscpso.fac2cli[M ])


    As a result, the algorithm selects the best solution that contains a minimum
of new services to be placed.
   The scheme representation of implemented genetic algorithm optimization is
shown in Figure 2.
8      G. Kontsevik et al.




               Fig. 2. Scheme of Genetic Algorithm implementation




4     Experiments


4.1   Study area


This paper considers the scenario of new industrial enterprise location in the
city within the development of priority industrial sectors according to the socio-
economic development strategy of the city. This paper considers the location
of an industrial enterprise in the port-industrial district of St. Petersburg. The
placed enterprise and selected city blocks are presented in Figure 3.




                             Fig. 3. Selected territory




   The neighborhoods to be considered were chosen as follows: according to
the hypothesis of jobs-housing mismatch, a balance between employee salary,
potential average rent, and distance from work is needed. The wages of potential
employees were taken as the average for skilled industrial workers in the city.
                                                        4. EXPERIMENTS             9

4.2   Data




All necessary data for services location, public transport networks, and residential
building parameters (to calculate estimated population) were gathered from
OpenStreetMap.




4.3   Method implementation




The current estimation of availability "at the considered moment of time" was
made with the help of the BlocksNet library [22]. The intermodal graph for the
selected territory is presented in Figure 4a. Estimation of availability of residents
of the selected neighborhoods for the service "Polyclinic" is presented in Figure
4b. Each service has its own standard of availability according to GOST (National
Standard). For polyclinic the normative of accessibility is 15 minutes.
    In this paper, all new polyclinics have a fixed (average) capacity of 400 people.
It should be noted that a necessary but insufficient condition to consider a
neighborhood as service-enabled is that it must fall within the service accessibility
zone. The accessibility was calculated between neighborhoods on an intermodal
graph built on OpenStreetMap public data.




(a) Geolayer with intermodal graph of pub- (b) Covered and not covered blocks by the
lic transport                              service

                                 Fig. 4. Input data
10      G. Kontsevik et al.




(a) Fitness progression in genetic algorithm (b) Distribution of required accessibility
                                             improvements (in minutes)

                         Fig. 5. Results of genetic algorithm




    Since the number of possible combinations in this case is large, a genetic
algorithm was chosen as a tool to select a sub-optimal solution. The genetic
algorithm receives a connectivity matrix as input and changes the values only in
the specified cells (i.e., neighborhoods that do not fit the condition for optimization
do not change the connectivity among themselves). As a result, the CLSCP-SO
algorithm calculates the optimal number of new clinics needed to meet demand.
The results of the algorithm are presented in Figure 5a and 5b.


   Figure 5a shows that by optimizing the accessibility time between blocks,
the required number of new services was reduced from 13 to 9. The results of
the distribution of the delta of connectivity change between quarters are shown
in Figure 5a. Figure 5b shows that the average time to improve transportation
connectivity is 10 minutes


    Figure 6 shows the blocks in which the service should be placed (the service
is represented by a green marker), the blocks in which the service has already
been previously (marked with red marker), and the uncovered blocks before
optimization and placement of additional services (marked in red). Figure 7 shows
reduce of travel time between blocks (lines, with gradient coloring depending on
the required value of change).
                                          4. EXPERIMENTS   11




Fig. 6. The location of existing and additional services
12      G. Kontsevik et al.




Fig. 7. Distribution of change in transportation connectivity between neighborhoods in
a given area



    It can be noted that in some cases the new service is placed in neighborhoods
where the service already exists. This indicates that there is a need to expand
or optimize the existing service. It can also be observed that due to the nature
of the routes and road network, in some cases. Only a slight improvement in
connectivity between distant neighborhoods is needed (2 to 4 minutes) and
conversely, between spatially close neighborhoods a reduction in accessibility
time may be required (10 to 13 minutes).


5    Conclusion
Through the application of heuristic optimization, it was found that by improving
transportation connectivity between blocks by applying optimal service placement
algorithms, it is possible to reduce the required number of services. However, it
should be noted that in order to fully solve the task, it is necessary to tackle
the problem considering the entire city’s data. In this case, the loads on services,
including new ones, will be redistributed between all the neighborhoods both in
case of adding new services and in case of changing the connectivity only on a
given territory and on the whole city area. The further work in this direction
may include multi-criteria optimization of transportation and landuse types of
urban blocks to consider changes in the scale of the whole city.
                                                              5. CONCLUSION             13

References

 1. Mouratidis, K.: Urban planning and quality of life: A review of pathways linking
    the built environment to subjective well-being. Cities 115, 103229 (2021)
 2. Park, C.L., Kubzansky, L.D., Chafouleas, S.M., Davidson, R.J., Keltner, D., Parsa-
    far, P., Conwell, Y., Martin, M.Y., Hanmer, J., Wang, K.H.: Emotional well-being:
    What it is and why it matters. Affective Science 4(1), 10–20 (2023)
 3. Regan, A., Radoić, N., Lyubomirsky, S.: Experimental effects of social behav-
    ior on well-being. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 26, 987–998 (2022), https://api.
    semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252188192
 4. Shekhar, H., Schmidt, A.J., Wehling, H.W.: Exploring wellbeing in human
    settlements-a spatial planning perspective. Habitat International 87, 66–74 (2019)
 5. Blumenberg, E., Siddiq, F.: Commute distance and jobs-housing fit. Transportation
    50(3), 869–891 (2023)
 6. Xiao, W., Wei, Y.D., Li, H.: Spatial inequality of job accessibility in shanghai: A
    geographical skills mismatch perspective. Habitat international 115, 102401 (2021)
 7. Zhang, L., Zhang, X., Huang, H., Zhang, L., Li, H.: Spatial accessibility of multiple
    facilities for affordable housing neighborhoods in harbin, china. Land 11(11), 1940
    (2022)
 8. Tuhkanen, H., Cinderby, S., De Bruin, A., Wikman, A., Adelina, C., Archer, D.,
    Muhoza, C.: Health and wellbeing in cities-cultural contributions from urban form
    in the global south context. Wellbeing, Space and Society 3, 100071 (2022)
 9. Bernábe-Loranca, M., González-Velázquez, R., Granillo-Martinez, E., Romero-
    Montoya, M., Barrera-Cámara, R.A.: P-median problem: A real case application.
    In: Intelligent Systems Design and Applications: 19th International Conference on
    Intelligent Systems Design and Applications (ISDA 2019) held December 3-5, 2019
    19. pp. 182–192. Springer (2021)
10. Murad, A., Faruque, F., Naji, A., Tiwari, A.: Using the location-allocation p-median
    model for optimising locations for health care centres in the city of jeddah city,
    saudi arabia. Geospatial health 16(2) (2021)
11. Wang, C., Han, C., Guo, T., Ding, M.: Solving uncapacitated p-median problem with
    reinforcement learning assisted by graph attention networks. Applied Intelligence
    53(2), 2010–2025 (2023)
12. Yu, M., Fu, Y., Liu, W.: An optimization method for equalizing the spatial ac-
    cessibility of medical services in guangzhou. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-
    Information 12(7) (2023), https://www.mdpi.com/2220-9964/12/7/292
13. Máximo, V.R., Cordeau, J.F., Nascimento, M.C.: A hybrid adaptive iterated
    local search heuristic for the maximal covering location problem. International
    Transactions in Operational Research (2023)
14. ElKady, S.K., Abdelsalam, H.M.: A modified particle swarm optimization algorithm
    for solving capacitated maximal covering location problem in healthcare systems.
    Applications of intelligent optimization in Biology and Medicine: current trends
    and open problems pp. 117–133 (2016)
15. Qu, Z., Wang, X., Song, X., Pan, Z., Li, H.: Location optimization for urban taxi
    stands based on taxi gps trajectory big data. Ieee Access 7, 62273–62283 (2019)
16. Gazani, M., Niaki, S.: The capacitated maximal covering location problem with
    heterogeneous facilities and vehicles and different setup costs: An effective heuristic
    approach. International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations 12(1),
    79–90 (2021)
14      G. Kontsevik et al.

17. Oudouar, F., Lazaar, M., El Miloud, Z.: A novel approach based on heuristics
    and a neural network to solve a capacitated location routing problem. Simulation
    Modelling Practice and Theory 100, 102064 (2020)
18. Rodriguez, S.A., Rodrigo, A., Aguayo, M.M.: A simulation-optimization approach
    for the facility location and vehicle assignment problem for firefighters using a
    loosely coupled spatio-temporal arrival process. Computers & Industrial Engineering
    157, 107242 (2021)
19. Huang, W., Khalil, E.B.: Walkability optimization: formulations, algorithms, and
    a case study of toronto. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
    Intelligence. vol. 37, pp. 14249–14258 (2023)
20. Lambora, A., Gupta, K., Chopra, K.: Genetic algorithm-a literature review. In:
    2019 international conference on machine learning, big data, cloud and parallel
    computing (COMITCon). pp. 380–384. IEEE (2019)
21. Mirjalili, S., Mirjalili, S.: Genetic algorithm. Evolutionary algorithms and neural
    networks: Theory and applications pp. 43–55 (2019)
22. Blocksnet – open library with tools for generation the city model and optimal
    requirements for future development with specified target parameters, https://
    github.com/aimclub/blocksnet
