      Assessment of spatial inequality in agglomeration
                          planning

 Georgii Kontsevik1[0000-0003-4757-8865], Igor Lavrov1[0000-0003-2506-8995], Aleksandr Moro-
 zov1[0009-0009-0889-9683], Leonid Kharlov1[0000-0002-6880-1766] and Sergey Mityagin1[0000-0001-
                                             9877-1687]


               1
                   ITMO University, Birzhevaya line, 14, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
                               mityagin.spb@gmail.com



       Abstract. The paper considers the problem of spatial inequality of agglomera-
       tions. The paper proposes an approach to the estimation of spatial inequality
       based on the intermodal transport graph and data on the placement of urban ser-
       vices in the agglomeration cities. This approach has been experimentally tested
       on the agglomeration of St. Petersburg. The result is an assessment of the influ-
       ence of cities in relation to each other, as well as the evaluation of each city by
       the availability of a particular type of service.

       Keywords: Network modeling, City graph, Agglomeration, Settlement system,
       Urban planning, Urban Environment Model, Informational Model, Algorithms
       on Graphs, Urban Neighborhood Model, Urban Environment Model, Urban
       Neighborhood Centrality, Urban Neighborhood Profile.


1      Introduction

The article is about spatial inequality of urban agglomerations. The spatial inequality is
defined as the socio-economic inequality of the population caused by differences in the
development of territories. Such distinctions, in turn, can be caused not only by geo-
graphical, but also historical, cultural and other reasons [1].
   The concept of spatial inequality is closely connected with the assessment of the
quality of life for the population of the studied territory. There are many studies on the
implementation of such an assessment in terms of one or more factors – for example,
the level of income or level of education [2], but there is no consensus among research-
ers on the rules for building a comprehensive assessment of the quality of life for the
population of a particular territory. This is partly due to the fact that there is no unified
definition of what "quality of life" is and what parameters it includes. In particular, the
following groups of parameters can be identified [3]: physical, mental, psychological,
social, cultural, economic, political and environmental, but there is no clear understand-
ing of how they can be formalized to build an integral assessment for the purpose of
comparing different territories with each other.
   The heterogeneity of the quality of life is clearly manifested when considering such
urban systems as agglomerations. The concept of "agglomeration" itself is quite vague:
2


it is not part of a formal administrative-territorial division and has no clear boundaries.
In this regard, the same agglomeration, depending on the chosen approach to defining
its boundaries, may include different towns and villages [4]. An urban agglomeration
is a group of cities that are territorially close and have stable economic, labor, recrea-
tional and cultural relations [5]. The region where an urban agglomeration is located
should have a highly developed transport infrastructure, be spatially compact and eco-
nomically closely integrated [6]. Urban agglomeration is a natural stage of urban de-
velopment and urbanization, when cities in specific regions begin to "cooperate", not
just compete with each other [7]. Urban agglomerations have some characteristics, such
as the integrity of economic markets, functional connectivity of territories, which are
achieved due to the developed transport infrastructure [8].
    This paper studies the concept of spatial inequality of territories and proposes an
approach to its assessment for agglomerations based on the construction of the transport
graph and data on the availability of services in the cities of agglomerations. Experi-
mental testing of the method was carried out on the example of the agglomeration of
St. Petersburg (Russia), which includes a number of territories of the city itself and the
surrounding cities of the Leningrad region. This agglomeration is the second largest in
the Russian Federation (after Moscow agglomeration) and is of interest for the study
partly because of the known heterogeneity of population on its territory.


2      Territorial dissimilarities in settlement systems

The settlement system in this paper is defined as a set of settlements that are territorially
close and functionally interconnected [9]. One of the actual problems both within one
and between several settlement systems is the differences in the quality of settlement
life caused not only by geographical differences of territories, but also by the histori-
cally established socio-economic disparities in their development.
    On one scale of consideration, agglomerations can be chosen as a settlement system.
In general, agglomerations can be defined as sets of cities and surrounding territories,
united by stable links of various types (labor, cultural, infrastructural) between their
populations. However, the delimitation of the boundaries of agglomerations, as well as
the boundaries of other settlement systems, is subject for a discussion due to the lack
of a unified approach among researchers.


2.1    Approaches for delimitation of agglomeration borders

The question of delimitating the boundaries of agglomeration depends on which pro-
cesses are chosen as fundamental for the formation of such a system of human settle-
ment. The two main categories of approaches to defining the concept of agglomeration
can be distinguished as economic and functional [10].
   The economic approach is based on statistical data on the socio-economic processes
in which the territory in question is involved. Such data for agglomerations can be the
following [11]:
                                                                                           3


 number of cities with population over a certain threshold;
 per capita GDP;
 non-agricultural industries’ impact on the GDP;
 clear distinction of economic belts of certain transportation radii.

   The functional approach is based on actual data on the human settlement and inter-
connections between settlements. The advantage of the approach is a broader set of data
that is publicly available: the number of population of territories and their parts, the
characteristics of transport infrastructure, the location and parameters of services – lo-
cations of interest to the population satisfying certain needs. In this regard, this ap-
proach was chosen for the construction of the agglomeration assessment model in the
framework of this work.


2.2    Spatial inequality problem: case study and countermeasures

One of the reasons of spatial inequality is different opportunities for earning money
between more advantaged areas with more amenities and services and peripheries and
rural areas that become poorer in comparison. Mastronardi and Cavallo's study demon-
strates that income inequality appears to be greater in “densely populated urban centers
with a high incidence of tertiary activities and young population” [12].
    However, it would be unreasonable to avoid creating urban centers since while rural
areas exhibit lower inequality, they also often lack basic healthcare, education, and mo-
bility services. In fact, setting up infrastructure in sparsely populated areas would be
too costly. So, rather than abolishing metropolises, Mastronardi and Cavallo suggest
redistributive policies that are supported by policies that affect market functioning, cor-
porate governance, intergenerational transmission of advantages and disadvantages,
and the link between structural and sectorial policies [12].
    Other studies also demonstrate that “high mobility areas have (i) less residential seg-
regation, (ii) less income inequality, (iii) better primary schools, (iv) greater social cap-
ital, and (v) greater family stability” [13] while “policies that exogenously improve
amenities in low-public good communities may increase segregation” [14]. Besides, as
the model of Sun et al. suggests, market-driven residential redevelopment tends to ex-
acerbate spatial inequality through facilitating income sorting (concentration of people
with high income in the advantaged areas) [15].
    Reducing the spatial inequality of agglomerations can be carried out in different
ways:
    (1) local actions – adding new opportunities for the population by creating new ser-
         vices in needy settlements;
    (2) connecting actions – improving the transport connectivity of the agglomeration
         through measures to improve its transport system;
    (3) administrative actions – by means of dispositive correction of the composition
         of agglomerations through stimulating measures for the settlement of people.
4


3      Spatial inequality modeling

Cities located outside the agglomeration core cannot always provide the full range of
services and opportunities to residents that are available in the "center" [16, 17]. There
are several common reasons why residents of peripheral cities travel to neighboring or
central cities [18]: work, education, retail, recreation.
   In this paper, spatial inequality is assessed through the accessibility/sufficiency of
large shopping and entertainment centers. Travelling from one city to another within
an agglomeration for the purpose of shopping is one of the most common after work
and study [18]. Data on labor migration is not openly available, so it is not expected to
be used.
   Retail trade is an important component of the urban economy. Large objects of trade
can have a wide service area and a large temporary transport accessibility (from 30
minutes) [19]. Cities and towns where such shopping centers are located can be points
of attraction, serving the needs of neighboring territories.


3.1    Selected agglomeration description

St. Petersburg agglomeration (the second largest in Russia) was chosen for the analysis
due to the known heterogeneity of population on its territory. The selected agglomera-
tion is shown on Figure 1.




                          Fig. 1. Saint Petersburg agglomeration
                                                                                          5


   For the analysis and assessment of spatial inequality, the cities and settlements that
are part of St. Petersburg and the Leningrad Oblast were selected according to the stud-
ies dedicated to the identification of the boundaries of the St. Petersburg agglomeration
[16,18]:

 St. Petersburg (Central, Admiralteisky, Petrogradsky, Vasi-leostrovsky, Kalininsky,
  Krasnogvardeisky, Nevsky, Frunzensky, and Kirovsky administrative districts as a
  whole; Primorsky district without the municipal entity Lakhta-Olgino and the settle-
  ment of Lisy Nos; Vyborgsky district without the settlement of Levashovo and Par-
  golovo; Moscow district without the territories of Aviagorodok and Pulkovo; Kras-
  noselsky district without Krasny Selo and Gorelovo);
 cities within the administrative boundary of St. Petersburg (Kol-pino; Pushkin; Pe-
  terhof; Shushary; Krasnoye Selo; Kronstadt; Pargolovo; Lomonosov; Sestroretsk;
  Zelenogorsk);
 cities within the Leningrad Oblast (Gatchina; Vyborg; Vsevolozhsk; Sosnovy Bor;
  Sertolovo; Murino; Tosno; Kudrovo).


3.2    Data selection and preprocessing

To model the spatial inequality of the St. Petersburg agglomeration the following data
are needed:

 population and cities in the agglomeration;
 about shopping and entertainment centers and their areas;
 intracity and external public transport routes.

   Population data are taken from the Federal State Statistics Service of the Russian
Federation Rosstat according to the results of the census for 2020 [20]. Geometries of
the agglomeration cities and data on shopping centers were obtained using the open
mapping service OpenStreetMap (OSM) [21]. The routes and stops of intracity (bus,
trolleybus, streetcar, metro) and external (trains and electric trains) public transport are
also taken from OSM by appropriate tags. The CityGeoTools library for modeling the
intermodal graph [22] is used to calculate the time of accessibility of shopping centers
and travel time between cities.


3.3    Accessibility graph: algorithm and construction

   A public transport graph was used to model service availability. The general scheme
of the algorithm is shown in Figure 2:




                           Fig. 2. General outline of the algorithm
6


   The first step is to select the types of transport used for modeling, as well as the cities
included in the agglomeration. Types of public transport selected for modeling the in-
termodal transport graph: tram, trolleybus, bus, train, subway. It is necessary to con-
sider intra-city modes of public transport, as accessibility is modeled between the cen-
ters of cities. In this paper, we have not considered accessibility by private car, as this
was not the purpose of the work.
   At the second stage, an intermodal graph was constructed for each city. The general
scheme of graph construction for one city is shown in Figure 3 below:




                        Fig. 3. Graph modeling algorithm for one city

   The graph modeling algorithm is taken from the work [23]. At the first stage, routes
and stops for the selected type of transport are loaded from OSM. Then they are com-
bined into a single network for each type of transport. At the end, all types of transport
are combined into one network, forming a single graph. The weights of the edges is the
time between the nodes (PT stops) of the graph. The difference from the work [23] in
this case is that to build a graph for agglomeration it is necessary not to cut the transport
routes by the geometry of the city, as it is done in the mentioned work (but it is possible
to limit them by the geometry of the selected area to discard unnecessary information).
Thus, a route from the OSM data relating to a city can go beyond the city, for example,
when a bus or train travels from one city to another. This change made it possible to
obtain data on connections between cities.
   The transport graph for one city, without cutting the routes by the city boundaries is
shown in Figure 4.
   It is important to note that Vyborg and St. Petersburg are connected by a high-speed
train line. The most distant from the other cities of the agglomeration, still connected
to the analyzed city centers, is Vyborg. Since in the current method the train speed is
the same everywhere in the graph, the weight of the edge was manually changed in
order to highlight the line. The high-speed train line on the transport subgraph is high-
lighted for clarity in Figure 5. Such a line exists only between these two cities in the
agglomeration and this reflects the inequality of the spatial component of the equity in
high-speed railways (HSR) [24]. Thus, this train allows Vyborg to be a full-fledged part
of the St. Petersburg agglomeration and maintain a good level of influence in the cotext
of social services, such as aforementioned “malls”.
                                                                                             7




                       Fig. 4. Transportation routes outside the city




Fig. 5. High-speed train between Vyborg and St. Petersburg (the core of the agglomeration)
8


   After obtaining the transport graph of one city, it is necessary to connect it to the
graph of the neighboring city. However, we cannot be sure that one route in the graph
of one city ends where the next route of another type in another graph begins. This
mismatch can be seen in the following Figure 6:




Fig. 6. Non-intersecting transport graphs of cities; and united non-intersecting transport graphs
of cities

    In order to connect the graphs of the two cities it is necessary to take into account
the possible transfers between one or more modes of transport. Thus, the nearest nodes
of the graphs (stops) within a radius of 100 meters were connected by a line. This con-
nection reflects the possibility of walking between stops. Accordingly, the weight of
such an additional edge will be the Euclidean distance between the points (the length
of the edge) divided by the speed of a pedestrian. It should be noted that in this case it
was not possible to construct a path between two selected points on the pedestrian
graph, because sometimes transport routes end at the stations, where there is no pedes-
trian graph.
    As a result, a transport graph covering the entire St. Petersburg agglomeration was
obtained, which is shown in Figure 7:
                                                                                          9




                 Fig. 7. Transport graph for the St. Petersburg agglomeration

   In order to calculate the distances between cities on the transport graph it is necessary
to use the following algorithm, as is shown in Figure 8:




               Fig. 8. The algorithm for calculating accessibility between cities

    This algorithm calculates accessibility between cities by different types of transport
using transfers between them.
    The distribution of shopping centers in St. Petersburg and Leningrad region by area
is shown in Figure 9:
10




Fig. 9. Distribution of Shopping Centers in Leningrad Oblast by area and distribution of shopping
centers in Leningrad Oblast with area larger than average

   Since the OSM data does not always accurately reflect reality and there may be small
shopping centers under the mall tag, and to reflect the fact that people are more likely
to go to another city for a large shopping center, only shopping centers with a larger
than average area in the Leningrad region were selected. The distribution of all malls
and only those whose area is larger than the average is shown in Figure 9.

   In order to estimate the spatial inequality in the agglomeration, it is necessary to
calculate the inequality coefficient:
   Let 𝐾 - be the number of cities in the agglomeration:

 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘 - normalized connectivity between cities 𝑖 and 𝑗. Constraint: 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘 <
   120 𝑚𝑖𝑛.;
 𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠 - the number of services in the city;
 𝐼 - the inequality indicator for the selected city;
 𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 - the population in the selected city.

                      𝐼 =               +∑      𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘 ∙                                       (1)


   In this paper, we use normalized weighting coefficients, because we compare cities
only within the agglomeration and not with the target value. As a result of calculating
the coefficient of spatial inequality between the cities of the St. Petersburg agglomera-
tion, we obtained an estimate for each city based on its distance from the other cities
and the number of services in the considered and the nearest cities. The right side of the
equation is shown in Figures 10 and 11. Figure 10 shows directly the weighting coeffi-
cient of the connection between the cities (𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘 ). Figure 11 shows the impact of cities
on each other, taking into account transport connectivity and the presence or absence
of the services in question. The results are presented as a map in Figure 12 below. The
values of the obtained indicators are presented in Table 1.
                                                                                            11




Fig. 10. Normalized weight coefficient of transport connection of cities in the agglomeration




                    Fig. 11. Weights of influence of cities on each other
12




Fig. 12. Provision of cities with "mall" service, taking into account the influence of neighboring
                                               cities

                               Table 1. Indicator threshold values

  Minimum value           Maximum value                          Description
       0                       0.2               The territory practically lacks the neces-
                                                 sary number of places providing the ser-
                                                 vice; the transport connection with the
                                                 neighboring territories provided with the
                                                 service is very poor
          0.2                     0.4            There are few or almost no service
                                                 points in the area, but the transport con-
                                                 nection to the neighboring service areas
                                                 is good
          0.4                     0.6            The area is well provided with the ser-
                                                 vice and has stable transportation links
                                                 with neighboring areas, compensating
                                                 the lack of its own needs
          0.6                     0.8            Territory is well provided with the ser-
                                                 vice, covering its own needs, but cannot
                                                 cover the needs of neighboring areas
          0.8                      1             Territory is provided with the service to
                                                 the extent that fully covers its and neigh-
                                                 boring territories' needs
                                                                                            13


4      Discussion

The calculation of the indicator in this paper is based on the transport graph of the
region and data on the location of individual services. The indicator allows to compare
the spatial inequality of individual cities of the agglomeration and thereby identify the
most problematic places. Solutions to reduce the spatial inequality can be either adding
new service points to the cities with the lowest index value, or improving their transport
connections with neighboring cities with the best index values through the development
of intercity transport infrastructure.
   At the same time, real passenger flows and the capacity of service points are not
taken into account due to the lack of detailed data. In addition, transport interconnec-
tions are considered as potentially possible for the existing infrastructure - in reality,
without a survey it is difficult to predict the purpose of trips of specific passengers, i.e.
the demand for specific services and the need to move between the cities of the agglom-
eration for a specific service. This aspect should be considered in further studies of
intra-regional spatial inequality.


5      Conclusion

The paper considers the concept of urban agglomeration, spatial inequality. The assess-
ment of spatial inequality was carried out by constructing an intermodal transport graph
with the selected type of service on the example of "mall" and its application on the
example of St. Petersburg agglomeration.
   As a result of modeling, it was possible to see the influence of cities on each other
in the agglomeration, taking into account their transport connectivity. It can be seen
that the cities that are closer to the center of the agglomeration are not equal to the more
distant cities. This happened due to their poor connectivity and the lack of points of
attraction (selected services) within these cities.

Acknowledgements. This research is financially supported by the Russian Science
Foundation, Agreement 17-71-30029 (https://rscf.ru/en/project/17-71-30029/), with
co-financing of Bank Saint Petersburg.


References
 1. D.i., U.: Theoretical and methodological foundations of economic inequality of regions.
    Vestnik (Herald) of Belgorod State Technological University named after V. G. Shukhov,
    120–126 (2018).
 2. Galster, G., Sharkey, P.: Spatial foundations of inequality: A conceptual model and empiri-
    cal overview. RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences. 3, 1–33
    (2017).
 3. Sinha, B.R.K.: Introduction: An Overview of the Concept of Quality of Life. In: Sinha,
    B.R.K. (ed.) Multidimensional Approach to Quality of Life Issues: A Spatial Analysis. pp.
    3–23. Springer, Singapore (2019).
14


 4. Liang, J., Li, F., Mao, L.: Review of the methods of delimitation for the spatial scope of
    urban agglomeration. In: 18th International Conference on Geoinformatics, 1–10 (2010).
 5. Fang C., Yu D.: China’s Urban Agglomerations. Springer Geography (2020).
 6. Fang C., Yu D.: Overview of the fundamental connotation and strategic position of China’s
    urban agglomerations. Springer Geography, 1–63 (2020).
 7. Georgievich A.E.: Оutlines of the theory of urban agglomerations’ self-development. Re-
    gional economy (2012).
 8. Tokunova G.: Transport Infrastructure as a Factor of Spatial Development of Agglomera-
    tions (Case Study of Saint Petersburg Agglomeration). Transportation Research Procedia.
    20, 649–652 (2017).
 9. Tkachenko, A. A.: Key concepts of the theory of resettlement: an attempt to rethink. Vestnik
    (Herald) of Moscow University. Series 5. Geography, 10–15 (2018).
10. Antonov, E. V., Makhrova, A. G.: Largest urban agglomerations and super-agglomerations
    in Russia. Izvestiya Rossiiskoi akademii nauk. Seriya geograficheskaya, 31–45 (2019).
11. Fang, C., Yu, D.: Urban agglomeration: An evolving concept of an emerging phenomenon.
    Landscape and Urban Planning. 162, 126–136 (2017).
12. Mastronardi, L., Cavallo, A.: The spatial dimension of income inequality: An analysis at
    municipal level. Sustainability. 12, 1622 (2020).
13. Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., Saez, E.: Where is the land of opportunity? The geogra-
    phy of intergenerational mobility in the United States. The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
    129, 1553–1623 (2014).
14. Banzhaf, H.S., Walsh, R.P.: Segregation and Tiebout sorting: The link between place-based
    investments and neighborhood tipping. Journal of Urban Economics. 74, 83–98 (2013).
15. Sun, W., Fu, Y., Zheng, S.: Local public service provision and spatial inequality in Chinese
    cities: The role of residential income sorting and land-use conditions. Journal of Regional
    Science. 57, 547–567 (2017).
16. Reznikov I.L.: Vyyavlenie granic Sankt-Peterburgskoj gorodskoj aglomeracii. Vestnik
    Sankt-Peterburgskogo universiteta Nauki o Zemle. 64, 89–103 (2017).
17. Garreau Joel: Edge city: life on the new frontier. 548 (1992).
18. Lachininsky S.S., Sorokin I.S.: Spatial structure and the development of settlements in the
    Saint Petersburg agglomeration. Baltic Region. 13, 48–69 (2021).
19. Yigitcanlar T., Sipe N., Evans R., Pitot M.: A GIS‐based land use and public transport ac-
    cessibility indexing model. 44, 30–37 (2010).
20. Rosstat — Vserossijskaya perepis’ naseleniya 2020 goda, https://rosstat.gov.ru/vpn_popul,
    last accessed 2023/04/07
21. OpenStreetMap, https://www.openstreetmap.org/#map=10/59.9512/30.2303, last accessed
    2023/04/05
22. CityGeoTools - python package of methods developed for analysis of the urban environ-
    ment, https://github.com/iduprojects/CityGeoTools, last accessed 2023/03/15
23. Mishina, M., Khrulkov, A., Solovieva, V., Tupikina, L., Mityagin, S.: Method of intermodal
    accessibility graph construction. Procedia Computer Science 212, 42–50 (2022).
24. Cavallaro, F., Bruzzone, F., Nocera, S.: Spatial and social equity implications for high-speed
    railway lines in Northern Italy. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 135,
    327–340 (2020)
